Added quick start guide for Java. (#41)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/quick-start/java.md

# Quick Start: Java and TimescaleDB

## Goal

> This quick start guide is designed to get the Java developer up and running with TimescaleDB as their database. 

Author: Sure, it's just a copy-paste from other guides (golang, ruby, python, node) :)

* [Connect Java to TimescaleDB](#new_database)
* [Create a relational table](#create_table)
* [Generate a hypertable](#generate_hypertable)
* [Insert a batch of rows into TimescaleDB](#insert_rows)
* [Execute queries on TimescaleDB](#execute_queries)

## Pre-requisites

To complete this tutorial, you will need a cursory knowledge of the Structured Query Language (SQL). 
The tutorial will walk you through each SQL command, but it will be helpful if you've seen SQL before.

To start, [install TimescaleDB][timescaledb-install]. Once your installation is complete,
you can proceed to ingesting or creating sample data and finishing the tutorial.

You will also need to install [Java Development Kit (JDK)][jdk] 
and [PostgreSQL Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) Driver][pg-jdbc-driver] as well.
All code is presented for Java 16 and above. 
If you are working with older JDK versions, use legacy coding techniques.

## Connect Java to TimescaleDB [](new-database)

### Step 1: Create a new Java application

For simplicity, we will use the application in a single file as an example. 
You can use any of your favorite build tools, including `gradle` and `maven`.

> Create a separate directory and navigate to it. 

Author: For simplicity there is no directory structure, just a single folder with `Main.java` file and postgres jdbc jar artefact. You don't have to create directory structure like the package path for single file source code. Starting in Java 11, we can use the following command to execute a single-file program: `java Main.java` ignoring 2 steps way: `javac Main.java` + `java Main`.

> Create a separate directory and navigate to it. 

Author: What version of JDK are you using? What is output of `java -version`?

> Create a separate directory and navigate to it. 

Reviewer: Java 11 😬 

here is my java version:

```
java -version                                                                         20:21:43
java version "1.8.0_231"
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_231-b11)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 25.231-b11, mixed mode)```

In it, create a text file with name and extension `Main.java` and the following content:

```java
package com.timescale.java;

public class Main {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}
```

From the command line in the current directory, try running the application with this command:

```bash

> $ java Main.java

Author: You created folder structure related to package path. It's not required for single file source code.

```

You should see the `Hello, World!` line output to your console. 
In case of an error, refer to the documentation and check if the JDK was installed correctly.

### Step 2: Import Postgres JDBC driver

To work with the `PostgreSQL`, you need to import the appropriate `JDBC Driver`. 
If you are using a dependency manager, include [PostgreSQL JDBC Driver as dependency][pg-jdbc-driver-dependency]. 
In this case, download [jar artifact of JDBC Driver][pg-jdbc-driver-artefact] and place it next to the `Main.java` file.

Now you can import the `JDBC Driver` into the Java application and display a list of available drivers for the check:

```java
package com.timescale.java;

import java.sql.DriverManager;

public class Main {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        DriverManager.drivers().forEach(System.out::println);
    }
}
```

Use this command to run all the following examples:

```bash

> $ java -cp *.jar Main.java

Reviewer: For some reason, this didn't work by default.

```bash
javac -cp postgresql-42.2.20.jar com/timescale/java/Main.java
com/timescale/java/Main.java:9: error: cannot find symbol
        DriverManager.drivers().forEach(System.out::println);
                     ^
  symbol:   method drivers()
  location: class DriverManager
1 error
```

Reviewer: I'm trying a few attempts and I'm a bit lost on the java compiler flags.

```bash
java -cp *.jar com/timescale/java/Main                16:02:44
Error: Could not find or load main class com.timescale.java.Main
javac -cp *.jar com/timescale/java/Main.java          16:02:47
com/timescale/java/Main.java:9: error: cannot find symbol
        DriverManager.drivers().forEach(System.out::println);
                     ^
  symbol:   method drivers()
  location: class DriverManager
1 error
```

Reviewer: I have [this jar](https://jdbc.postgresql.org/download/postgresql-42.2.20.jar) in my folder.

Author: I think this problem is related to the same thing: you tried to create folder structure com/timescaledb/java that should be skipped and replace just with folder contains 2 files: Main.java and postgres jdbc jar.

            stmt.execute(createSensorTableQuery);
        }

        var showAllTablesQuery = "SELECT tablename FROM pg_catalog.pg_tables WHERE schemaname = 'public'";
        try (var stmt = conn.createStatement();
             var rs = stmt.executeQuery(showAllTablesQuery)) {
            System.out.println("Tables in the current database: ");
            while (rs.next()) {
                System.out.println(rs.getString("tablename"));
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Congratulations, you've successfully created a relational table in TimescaleDB using Java.

## Generate a hypertable [](generate_hypertable)

In TimescaleDB, the primary point of interaction with your data is a [hypertable][timescaledb-hypertable],
the abstraction of a single continuous table across all space and time intervals, 
such that one can query it via standard SQL.

Virtually all user interactions with TimescaleDB are with hypertables.
Creating tables and indexes, altering tables, inserting data, and selecting data,
can (and should) all be executed on the hypertable.

A hypertable is defined by a standard schema with column names and types, 
with at least one column specifying a time value.

> ### Step 1: Formulate the CREATE TABLE SQL statement for your hypertable

Reviewer: Maybe we could avoid the repetition of `Formulate ... statement for your hypertable` in all the subtitles?

I'd call like:

```md
### Step 1: Create `sensor_data` table with timestamp
...
### Step 2: Call `create_hypertable` for `sensor_data` table
...
### Step 3: Wrap previous steps into a java application
...
```

Or without emphasis in the terms:

```md
### Step 1: Create sensors data table
...
### Step 2: Create hypertable for sensors data
...
### Step 3: Execute previous steps from your Java code
```

Author: Sure, I totally agree. Almost all text is copy-paste from other quick-starts. I just tried to repeat everything from already exist guides but on java language :)

Reviewer: Yes! they're full of issues and let's try to improve from here! Thanks again for your patience!

First, we create `CREATE TABLE` SQL statement for our hypertable. 
Notice how the hypertable has the compulsory time column:

```sql
CREATE TABLE sensor_data (
    time TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL,
    sensor_id INTEGER REFERENCES sensors (id),
    temperature DOUBLE PRECISION,
    cpu DOUBLE PRECISION
)
```

### Step 2: Formulate create hypertable SELECT statement for your hypertable

> Next you can formulate the `SELECT` statement to convert the table we created in Step 1 into a hypertable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you can formulate the `SELECT` statement to convert the table we created in Step 1 into a hypertable.
```

> Next we formulate the `SELECT` statement to convert the table we created in Step 1 into a hypertable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next you can formulate the `SELECT` statement to convert the table we created in Step 1 into a hypertable. 
```

> Note that we must specify the table name which we wish to convert to a hypertable 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you must specify the table name to convert to a hypertable 
```

and its time column name as the two arguments, 
as mandated by the [`create_hypertable` docs][timescaledb-hypertable-create-docs]:

```sql

> SELECT create_hypertable('sensor_data', 'time')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT create_hypertable('sensor_data', 'time');
```

```

> ### Step 3: Execute Statements from Step 1 and Step 2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Execute statements from step 1 and step 2
```

> Now we bring it all together by executing our statement from step 1, 
> then executing our statement from step 2 
> and committing our changes to database:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you can bring it all together by executing the statement from step 1, 
then executing the statement from step 2 
and committing your changes to the database:
```

```java
package com.timescale.java;

import java.sql.Connection;
import java.sql.DriverManager;
import java.sql.SQLException;

public class Main {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        final var connUrl = "jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/postgres?user=postgres&password=postgres";
        try (var conn = DriverManager.getConnection(connUrl)) {
            createSchema(conn);
        } catch (SQLException ex) {
            System.err.println(ex.getMessage());
        }
    }

    private static void createSchema(final Connection conn) throws SQLException {
        try (var stmt = conn.createStatement()) {
            stmt.execute("""
                    CREATE TABLE sensors (
                        id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
                        type TEXT NOT NULL,
                        location TEXT NOT NULL
                    )
                    """);
        }

        try (var stmt = conn.createStatement()) {
            stmt.execute("""
                    CREATE TABLE sensor_data (
                        time TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL,
                        sensor_id INTEGER REFERENCES sensors (id),

>                         temperature DOUBLE PRECISION,
>                         cpu DOUBLE PRECISION

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                        value DOUBLE PRECISION
```

                    )
                    """);
        }

        try (var stmt = conn.prepareStatement("SELECT create_hypertable('sensor_data', 'time')")) {
            stmt.execute();
        }
    }
}
```

> Congratulations, you’ve successfully created a hypertable in your TimescaleDB database using Java!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you've successfully created a hypertable in your TimescaleDB database using Java.
```

## Insert a batch of rows into TimescaleDB [](insert_rows)

> Here’s a typical pattern you’d use to insert some data into a table. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's a typical pattern you could use to insert some data into a table. 
```

> In the example below, we insert the relational data from list of sensors, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example below, insert the relational data from list of sensors, 
```

into the relational table named `sensors`.

> First, we open a connection to the database, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, open a connection to the database, 
```

> then using prepared statements formulate our `INSERT` SQL statement 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then using prepared statements formulate the `INSERT` SQL statement 
```

> and then we execute that statement:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and then execute that statement:
```

```java
final List<Sensor> sensors = List.of(
        new Sensor("a", "floor"),
        new Sensor("a", "ceiling"),
        new Sensor("b", "floor"),
        new Sensor("b", "ceiling"));
for (final var sensor : sensors) {
    try (var stmt = conn.prepareStatement("INSERT INTO sensors (type, location) VALUES (?, ?)")) {
        stmt.setString(1, sensor.type());
        stmt.setString(2, sensor.location());
        stmt.executeUpdate();
    }
}
```

> We can insert a batch of rows into TimescaleDB in a couple of different ways. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can insert a batch of rows into TimescaleDB in a couple of different ways. 
```

            }
        }

        final var sensorDataCount = 100;
        final var insertBatchSize = 10;
        try (var stmt = conn.prepareStatement("""
                INSERT INTO sensor_data (time, sensor_id, temperature, cpu)
                VALUES (
                    generate_series(now() - INTERVAL '24 hours', now(), INTERVAL '5 minutes'),
                    floor(random() * (3) + 1)::INTEGER,
                    random() * 100,
                    random()
                )
                """)) {
            for (int i = 0; i < sensorDataCount; i++) {
                stmt.addBatch();

                if ((i > 0 && i % insertBatchSize == 0) || i == sensorDataCount - 1) {
                    stmt.executeBatch();
                }
            }
        }
    }

    private record Sensor(String type, String location) {
    }
}
```

<highlight type="tip">
If you are inserting data from a CSV file, we recommend the [timescale-parallel-copy tool](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-parallel-copy), 
which is a command line program for parallelizing PostgreSQL's built-in `COPY` functionality for bulk inserting data into TimescaleDB.
</highlight>

> Congratulations, you’ve successfully inserted data into TimescaleDB using Java!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you've successfully inserted data into TimescaleDB using Java.
```

## Execute queries on TimescaleDB [](execute_queries)

### Step 1: Define the SQL query

> First, define the SQL query you’d like to run on the database. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, define the SQL query you'd like to run on the database. 
```

The example below contains a query which combines time-series and relational data. 

> It returns the average cpu values for every 15 minute interval for sensors with specific type and location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It returns the average CPU values for every 15 minute interval for sensors with specific type and location.
```

```sql
SELECT time_bucket('15 minutes', time) AS bucket, avg(cpu)
FROM sensor_data
JOIN sensors ON sensors.id = sensor_data.sensor_id
WHERE sensors.type = ? AND sensors.location = ?
GROUP BY bucket
ORDER BY bucket DESC
```

Notice the use of placeholders for sensor type and location.

### Step 2: Execute the query

> Now we can execute query with prepared statement and read out the result set 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you can execute the query with the prepared statement and read out the result set 
```

                    random()
                )
                """)) {
            for (int i = 0; i < sensorDataCount; i++) {
                stmt.addBatch();

                if ((i > 0 && i % insertBatchSize == 0) || i == sensorDataCount - 1) {
                    stmt.executeBatch();
                }
            }
        }
    }

    private static void executeQueries(final Connection conn) throws SQLException {
        try (var stmt = conn.prepareStatement("""
                SELECT time_bucket('15 minutes', time) AS bucket, avg(cpu)
                FROM sensor_data
                JOIN sensors ON sensors.id = sensor_data.sensor_id
                WHERE sensors.type = ? AND sensors.location = ?
                GROUP BY bucket
                ORDER BY bucket DESC
                """)) {
            stmt.setString(1, "a");
            stmt.setString(2, "floor");

            try (var rs = stmt.executeQuery()) {
                while (rs.next()) {
                    System.out.printf("%s: %f%n", rs.getTimestamp(1), rs.getDouble(2));
                }
            }
        }
    }

    private record Sensor(String type, String location) {
    }
}
```

> Congratulations, you've successfully executed a query on TimescaleDB using Java and PostgreSQL JDBC.

Reviewer: Missing the 🎉 Emoji 😄

Author: Before that, there was an exclamation mark at the end of the sentence, but @Loquacity removed it. I thought that excessive impression is not welcome. Although, of course, I would add emoji 😆

Reviewer 2: I'm a tech writer, I thought the "Congratulations" was probably exuberant enough 😂  I don't mind what we choose, though, as long as it's consistent everywhere 👍

> Congratulations, you’ve successfully executed a query on TimescaleDB using Java and PostgreSQL JDBC!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you've successfully executed a query on TimescaleDB using Java and PostgreSQL JDBC.
```

## Next steps

> Now that you’re able to connect, read, and write to a TimescaleDB instance from your Java application, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you're able to connect, read, and write to a TimescaleDB instance from your Java application, 
```

be sure to check out these advanced tutorials:

* Get up and running with TimescaleDB with our [Getting Started][timescaledb-getting-started] tutorial.
* Refer to the [PostgreSQL JDBC Driver documentation][pg-jdbc-driver-docs] for more information.

[timescaledb-install]: /how-to-guides/install-timescaledb/
[timescaledb-getting-started]: /getting-started/

> [timescaledb-hypertable]: /overview/core-concepts/

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[timescaledb-hypertable]: /overview/core-concepts/hypertables-and-chunks/
```

Reviewer 3: Just correct this one link but otherwise great! You've done a great job adapting what we had. As @Loquacity mentioned, it's obvious that all of these Quick Starts are in need of some attention to build further.  This is a good reminder to do that!

Thanks again for the contribution!!
